
========== PAGE 116 ==========
2-38 
design procedures including FoSSA-Foundation Stress & Settlement Analysis (Adama 
Engineering 2003). Once the preliminary spacing is determined, the total project quantities 
can be computed from the project geometry. 
4.4 
Design Example 
A highway embankment is planned at a location where available borings indicate a profile of 
20 feet of normally consolidated clay with sand lenses over rock. Total settlement, based on 
one-dimensional drainage is estimated at 12 inches, with 90 percent occurring in 10 years. 
This estimate is based on preliminary evaluations of compression and consolidation 
coefficients obtained from classification data and liquid limit of 60. 
The available construction time is on the order of 18 months; hence it is desirable to 
accelerate settlements by the use of PVDs to a point at which 90 percent of the total 
settlements would occur within about one year, without a surcharge load. To estimate 
feasibility and cost, a potential spacing must be determined. 
From Figure 2-10, using the center curve, an estimated coefficient of consolidation (cv) of 0.1 
ft2/day is obtained, and based on the existence of horizontal sand lenses in the profile, a 
coefficient of horizontal consolidation (ch) of 2 times cv can be assumed. Equation 2-1 can be 
solved for various drain spacings, using an equivalent diameter of drain of 2.5 inches to 
obtain the field time required to attain 90 percent consolidation. The solution using triangular 
spacing indicates required times on the order of 300 days at an approximate spacing of 8 feet 
or 500 days at an approximate spacing of 10 feet. 
Note that this feasibility design method is only suitable for preliminary design or a quick 
check of a detailed design to determine if there are any errors. Since feasibility design is 
solely predicated on the liquid limit determined, it must be representative of the compressible 
stratum. 

========== PAGE 117 ==========
2-39 
5.0 
CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION CONTROL 
5.1 
Introduction 
PVD construction equipment, methods and materials, are well established with a proven 
track record of many successfully completed projects in the last several decades. The design 
concepts are well understood and the accuracy of the design is almost directly related to the 
accurate determination of the horizontal coefficient of consolidation. Therefore, method 
specifications are almost always used to implement this ground modification technology. 
5.2 
Specification Development 
The role of good specifications is to reduce the problems, risks, and cost of PVD installations 
and to ensure an installation that achieves the intended objective of the design. To 
accomplish the above, agencies usually specify the general construction method and controls 
for PVD installation. Under this contracting method, the designer details the spacing, the 
extent and length of the drains, as well as the details of the drainage blanket (usually 
specified separately under earthwork items), and the horizontal discharge drains. End result 
specifications are not common since they would require extensive soil exploration and design 
by the contractor. 
The specifications should provide the PVD installer as much flexibility as possible in 
achieving the intended result. The specifications should include quality control and assurance 
procedures. Initial installation trial drains should be required to establish standard 
procedures. At this stage of construction, such items as mandrel size, depth gauges, splicing 
procedures, verticality, and materials should be carefully inspected for compliance. Visual 
observations and periodic checks can then determine any variances or concerns once 
production has begun. 
Inspection personnel should check the physical measurement of drain sizes (thickness and 
width) for compliance to specifications and variances from material submittals. If significant 
differences are noted, laboratory testing may be required to determine if PVD materials 
comply with specifications. 
As part of the development of GeoTechTools, an extensive evaluation was made of 
specifications for PVDs. Eight specifications written by state DOTs, as well as the guide 
specification presented in the 2006 version of this manual, were reviewed and evaluated. 
These specifications were used to develop a guide specification entitled Standard Method 
Approach Specification for Prefabricated Vertical Drains and Fill Preloading that is intended 
to be a complete and fair specification containing commentary and instructions that is easily 
adaptable by the user for a specific project. This guide specification can be accessed on the 

========== PAGE 118 ==========
2-40 
GeoTechTools website under the Prefabricated Vertical Drains and Fill Preloading 
Technology Information page. An additional specification resource is the recently published 
Wick Drain Guide Specification (Method), prepared by the Ground Improvement Committee 
of the Deep Foundations Institute (DFI 2014). This specification can be found by accessing 
the Ground Improvement Committee webpage on the DFI website (http://www.dfi.org/). 
Regardless of which PVD specification is used, it is recommended that the Hansbo (1986), 
Rixner et al. (1986a), Holtz and Christopher (1987), and Bo et al. (2005) references be 
reviewed to ensure that all PVD material and installation requirements are included. 
5.3 
Quality Assurance 
One major advantage of the PVDs over other vertical drainage systems is the simplicity of 
field control. Once trial drains have been satisfactorily completed, inspection mainly consists 
of recording depths and locations of each drain, observing splices and verticality of 
equipment, taking occasional material samples for inspection and testing, and noting any 
major variances in procedure. 
To ensure proper performance, the drains must be installed in accordance with the plans and 
specifications. It is important that field inspection personnel know the procedures and 
possible ramifications of any deviations. 
The construction monitoring personnel should be thoroughly familiar with the contract 
drawings and specifications and should have a good understanding of the purpose of PVDs. 
The engineer in charge should have a good understanding of the total PVD solution, 
including site preparation, fill placement, and other items that might influence the 
performance of PVDs. Inspection of the PVD installation after initial procedures are 
established can become quite repetitive and monotonous. However, when changes or 
variations occur, these should be discussed immediately with personnel familiar with the 
project design requirements.  
Other items of significance in construction, such as the drainage blanket material quality, 
embankment placement and compaction, and surcharge loading rate, must also be monitored. 
5.3.1 Site Preparation 
Site preparation includes any excavation and grading to prepare the site for installation of 
PVDs. This may include site clearing, excavation and/or filling operations to bring the site to 
grade, and construction of a working platform or drainage blanket. It is also important that 
the grade be such that a drainage blanket remains continuous and surface drainage will not 
erode the blanket to the extent where it is no longer continuous. 

========== PAGE 119 ==========
2-41 
During construction of a working platform or drainage blanket, the field inspection personnel 
should be monitoring for any unusual soil movements, which would be indications of mud 
waving or a potential failure. On some projects, working mats or drainage blankets were 
installed too thick, creating failures, which were very expensive to repair. In one example 
project, a contractor installed a 5 feet haul road over a 2 feet drainage blanket prior to PVD 
installation in order to have access to a piling location. This haul road caused an extensive 
failure of the entire area that was to be stabilized.  
5.3.2 Prefabricated Vertical Drain Material and Installation Equipment 
Once the equipment and materials are checked for compliance with the specifications, the 
remaining field observations are rather simple. The major items to be monitored are 
verticality, depth of installation, and location. Most projects will provide an estimated depth 
or elevation across the site. It is routine to anticipate local variations from this estimate. 
However, the depth of PVDs should vary only slightly from that of adjacent drains. The 
inspector should refer to pertinent borings for a guideline to determine if proper depths are 
achieved or if there is a significant variance in soil conditions. 
5.3.2.1 Material 
Prior to installation, the PVD material should be visually observed to ensure that it is similar 
to that originally submitted and tested. The core and filter jacket should be continuous and 
comply with required dimensions, and the materials should not have been damaged during 
handling or storage. 
Many specifications list intricate tests to be performed on the PVD materials. Many of these 
tests are taken from manufacturer's data and quite often are far beyond what is necessary. 
However, an individual project may have specific criteria, which are dependent on some 
stringent design or performance requirement. 
5.3.2.2 Equipment 
Inspection personnel should determine that the equipment complies with specification 
requirements. Some of the important items to be checked are the following: 
•
Penetration method
•
Mandrel shape, size, and stiffness
•
Anchor type and size
•
Method to measure and determine penetration depth
